---
layout: post
title: Deixis
comments: true
---

When someone says to you, "here" or "now", you probably know what he
means. "Here" might the room that you are both sitting in. "Now" would
be the span of time you spent sitting together. But if either word
were uttered under different circumstances, it could mean something
very different. For example, if I called you from the Andes and I used
the word, "here", it would mean a mountainside somewhere - possibly
thousands of miles away from the aforementioned room. The same word
can mean both the room and the mountainside because of [deixis][].

[deixis]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deixis

Deixis is a form of [exophora][], which is an utterance that is given
meaning by the context it is uttered in. Specifically, deixis
represents the speech event itself: deictic expressions reference the
speaker, the speaker's utterances, the speaker's location, and the
time at which the speech event occurs. There are different types of
deictic expressions that refer to each particular aspect.

[exophora]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exophora

[Personal pronouns][], such as "I", "you", "he", and "she", are deictic
expressions. "I" refers simply to the speaker. The other pronouns are
defined by the relation the referenced person has to the speaker in
the discourse. As the role of speaker switches from person to person,
the context represented by deixis in understood by participants of the
discourse to change too.

[Personal pronouns]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Personal_pronoun

<!-- more -->

Location and time are a little more complicated. Whenever someone
speaks - or writes, or is quoted, etc. - there is an implicit deictic
center that is formed in the minds of the speaker and any listeners. A
deictic center is the point in space and time that spatial and
temporal deictic expressions refer to. "Here" and "now" are the
simplest examples. The verbs "to come" and to "to go" are also spatial
deictic expressions: "to come" means motion towards the deictic
center, and "to go" means motion away.

Based on this analysis, the phrase "come here" seems redundant at
first. But actually the addition of "here" can be important, due to a
phenomenon called *sympathetic deixis*. It is not uncommon, especially
in phone conversations, to hear an utterance like, "I will come by
later". For the speaker to move toward the deictic center is almost
nonsensical when the speaker is the deictic center. But in this case
sympathetic deixis causes the deictic center to shift from the
speaker's location to the listener's location. So motion towards the
deictic center actually translates to motion toward the listener.

Note that the shift caused by sympathetic deixis does not necessarily
affect all the aspects of deixis. In the example above the meanings of
personal pronouns do not change after the deictic center has shifted;
in a similar sentence, "I will come to see you", "I" refers to the
speaker, and "you" refers to the listener - as would be expected with
or without a shifted deictic center.

An especially fun deictic puzzle is often heard in answering machine
messages like, "I'm not here right now". It isn't possible that the
deictic center is fixed upon the speaker during this message, because
it is not possible for the speaker to not occupy his own location. So
there must be sympathetic deixis in effect to shift the deictic center
either spatially or temporally. As someone who has been on the
receiving end of this message, I expect "here" to mean the location
where the message was recorded, and "now" to be the time when I am
calling. By that analysis the spatial location of the deictic center
remains fixed on the location of the speech event, while the temporal
aspect shifts to the listening event via sympathetic deixis. There is
another possible analysis where both spatial and temporal sympathetic
deictic shifts occur. In that case the spatial shift does not move the
location of the deictic center to the listener, but instead moves it
to the place where the listener expects it to be: in this case
wherever the speaker's phone is. Under either analysis, the answering
machine example demonstrates that deictic shifts can be temporal as
well as spatial.

There are other forms of deictic expressions. There is a more complete
list in [the Wikipedia article on deixis][deixis].
