---
layout: post
title: International Phonetic Alphabet
---

In [last week's post][Anatomy of a Syllable] I provided phonetic
transcriptions of some example words using the International Phonetic
Alphabet, or IPA for short. I thought it would be helpful to follow
that up with some information about what the IPA is, and how to read
it. And as a bonus, after learning about IPA transcription you will be
able to better read pronunciation guides on Wikipedia.

[Anatomy of a Syllable]: http://sitr.us/ling/2007/09/24/anatomy-of-a-syllable/

You have probably seen many phonetic transcriptions before -
especially as pronunciation guides in dictionaries. In dictionaries it
is common to see a transcription convention that uses English spelling
conventions to represent sounds. For example, the word "elucidate"
might be transcribed as (ee-LOO-suh-date). That system is handy
because it is immediately familiar to anyone who has experience
reading stuff in English. But it has drawbacks too. There are a few
main problems that are especially important for linguists; there are
lots of linguists all over the world who are used to languages with
entirely different spelling conventions. For example, the sound in
English that is represented as "y" - the consonant, not the vowel - is
written in Icelandic as "j". There are also a lot of languages with
sounds that just don't exist in English. Linguists need to be able to
transcribe those sounds; but since they don't exist in English there
is no spelling convention to represent them. In fact there is no one
language with enough spelling conventions to represent every sound in
every language in the world. And finally, English spelling is
ambiguous, as is the spelling of almost any language. That is already
demonstrated by the need to add a note to distinguish "y" the
consonant from "y" the vowel or any of the other vowel sounds
represented by "y".

To solve all these problems, a group of linguistics developed the
International Phonetic Alphabet in the late nineteenth century. The
first standardized version was created in 1888. But it has been
revised somewhat since then. The purpose of IPA is to provide a
standard set of symbols that are used to represent sounds so that the
same symbols always represent the sounds, even to people from
different language backgrounds. Using the IPA it is theoretically
possible to represent every sound in every language in the
world. Though occasionally a new language is discovered with a new
sound that we didn't know anything about before, which has to be
quickly added to the IPA.

IPA was originally developed by French and British linguists, so it
uses characters derived from the Latin alphabet and symbols are
matched to sounds in a ways that are generally familiar to
Europeans. But even in the Western world people have different ideas
about how to spell things, so the IPA adopts some different phonetic
conventions from different languages. For example, I mentioned earlier
that the sound represented by "y" in English is spelled "j" in, among
others languages, Icelandic; and in fact the symbol for that sound in
IPA is [j]. Here is [the complete IPA chart in its most recent
revision][Full IPA chart]. And by the way: in IPA, the word
"elucidate" is transcribed [i'lu.sə.deɪt].

[Full IPA chart]: http://www.linguiste.org/phonetics/ipa/chart/

The sound an IPA symbol represents is described by the *place of
articulation* of the sound, an the *manner of articulation*. When you
voice a consonant you, you press your tongue against the roof of your
mouth, or in some cases you press your lips together or put the tip of
your tongue between your teeth. The exact spot on where you press your
tongue is the place of articulation. For example, when you say [t] you
press the tip of your tongue against a spot towards the front of your
mouth called the alveolar ridge; whereas when you say [k] you press
the back of your tongue against your soft palate, which linguists call
the velum. [t] and [k] have the same manner of articulation - they are
both plosives, which means that they are articulated by completely
stopping air from flowing out of the mouth for a moment. But they have
different places of articulation. Early on in a linguist's career he
learns all about the structures of the mouth, throat, and nose to
learn how each can be used to produce various sounds. I will explain
some of the details in future articles; in the meantime it would
probably be easiest to look up IPA symbols using [this IPA chart on
Wikipedia][IPA chart for English], which is specially designed for
English speakers and provides example words to illustrate each sound.

[IPA chart for English]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPA_Chart_for_English

Wikipedia provides the transcription for the English "r" as [ɹ]. This
is the most technically correct transcription, since in IPA [r]
represents a rolled "r", which is heard in Spanish. In linguistics
speak, [r] is a trill and [ɹ] is a liquid. However, English doesn't
have a trill, so people transcribing English often use [r] instead of
[ɹ] because the former is more familiar - and easier to type. It is
considered acceptable to make substitutions like that in cases where
readers are unlikely to be confused by the switch. So when I
transcribe an English word using [r] instead of [ɹ] I'm not actually
trying to make you practice pronouncing trills.

As an aside, the rolled "r" in French is not the same sound as the
rolled "r" in Spanish. The French "r" is transcribed [ʀ]. Both sounds
are trills, so they share the same manner of articulation; but they
have different places of articulation. [ɹ] is alveolar, meaning that
to pronounce it the tip of the tongue is positioned on the alveolar
ridge, in the same spot it is placed when pronouncing [t]. The sound
is produced by vibrating the tongue against the roof of the mouth,
which is what makes it a trill. To pronounce [ʀ], the back of the
tongue is placed against the uvula and vibrates against that.

To make the alphabet more flexible, IPA employs a number of
diacritics. Diacritics are small marks placed above or below a
character. In IPA they are used to describe characteristics of a sound
that differ slightly from the sound usually represented by a bare
character. Last week I talked about consonants that are used as
syllable nuclei, which are called syllabic consonants. Syllabicity is
considered a phonological feature, so it is indicated with a
diacritic. For example, the syllabic version of [n] is [n̩].

Another example of a diacritic is ʰ, which is used to indicate
aspiration. Did you know that the letter "p" in English is used to
represent two different sounds? The "p" sounds in "pull" and "stop"
are slightly different. You can tell if you put your hand in front of
your mouth, less than an inch away, and say each word. You will feel a
puff of air on your hand when you say the "p" in "pull"; there is a
puff when you say "stop" too, but it is not nearly as strong. A sound
that makes that strong puff of air is said to be *aspirated*, and is
marked with a diacritic that looks like a superscripted "h". So the
IPA representation for an aspirated "p" is /pʰ/ and an unaspirated "p"
is simply /p/.

Even though they are technically different sounds, English speakers
treat /p/ and /pʰ/ as being the same. So they are written with the
same letter. And in IPA they are usually both transcribed as [p] for
simplicity. But on occasion it is important to have the ability to
distinguish the two. The difference between sounds that are exactly
the same and sounds that are treated as the same by language speakers
is a very important consideration in linguistics - and it has to do
with the sudden switch from square brackets to slashes surrounding the
transcriptions above. I will talk about that in a future article too.
