---
layout: post
title: "Movie Review: Captain America"
type: tumble
---

I watched Captain America: The First Avenger now that it is on Netflix.
I didn't think it was very good.  Afterward I checked a couple of movie
reviews, one from Roger Ebert and one from the New York Times.  Both
made the same claim: that Captain America was better than Thor or Green
Lantern.  Why are these guys so down on Thor?  The characters, pacing,
and story of Thor felt right to me.  On the other hand I think that
Captain America lacked character development, felt rushed at times, and
had an underdeveloped story.

Allow me to elaborate.  Captain America has a promising beginning.
Scrawny Steve Rogers desperately wants to enlist to fight in World War
II; but the army won't take him due to his tiny size and lengthy list of
health problems.  The effect that make Rogers appear to be a skinny
short guy who later turns into a much taller, very buff guy are
particularly impressive.  It would have been seamless except that
I spent the first 30 minutes of the movie wondering how the filmmakers
pulled that off.  The development of Steve Rogers and the Army scientist
who turns him into Captain America are pretty good.  Also there is Tommy
Lee Jones.  You can't have too much of Tommy Lee Jones.

The one piece that is really missing from the introduction is someone
asking Rogers if he really wants to undergo a highly experimental,
permanent treatment.  It feels like that scene got cut somehow.  There
is a moment where scientist-guy asks, "are you ready for this?"  But
that comes at just about the point of no return.

After this, things kind of go downhill.  The movie features an
obligatory, but awfully clumsy, romance.  That whole arc should have
been thrown out, in my opinion.  The main effect is to rob Agent Carter
of a chance at becoming a fully-developed character.  She briefly
alludes to her own struggle to become successful despite people seeing
her as just a woman.  Then Cap goes and treats her the same way.  Carter
is supposed to be a badass in her own right.  But that aspect ends up
overshadowed by her role as a love interest.

There is an entertaining scene where Cap, shortly after making the usual
offend-the-love-interest gaffe, holds up his new shield and asks Agent
Carter, "What do you think?"  Carter picks up a nearby handgun and fires
three rounds straight at him.  After all three rounds are stopped by the
shield she says, "It seems to work."  I don't think that this is the
blow for feminism that the writers may have intended.  But as an example
of the gee-women-are-crazy genre it is good.

It happens that Carter fires that weapon in a room with a lot of
bystanders standing around.  Thankfully the bullets flatten against the
shield and fall harmlessly to the ground.  Apparently the shield is
ricochet-proof due to its convenient property of negating kinetic
energy.  If I understood correctly, that is because the shield is made
of "vibranium", a "completely vibration-free" metal that is so rare that
the country's entire supply went into making that one shield.

I understand that establishing an emotional connection between Cap and
another character is supposed to make the end of the movie more
poignant.  That would be the part where Cap makes his heroic sacrifice
while talking to his sweetheart via radio - both knowing that they are
never going to see each other again.  If that connection had been more
believable I might have been able to forget that I have seen this done
about a bajillion times.  In most of those cases it was done better.

If the romance story had been cut that time could have been put to good
use on character development for Cap's team and for Cap's own
development as a superhero.  When he officially takes on action hero
status, Cap recruits a random assortment of guys that he had previously
busted out of a POW facility.  There is little indication given as to
why Cap handpicked these particular people.  One guy was in basic
training with him, so at least he knows that guy.  I think that guy's
name is Hodge.  Though in training Hodge acted like an ass and got
punched in the face.  One of the other team members is Cap's best friend
from back home.  So that is kind of an explanation.  There are hints
later that each of these guys excels at a particular skillset.  One guy
is seen blowing up a tank single-handedly.  Another guy shoots a sniper
rifle at one point.  A third guy demonstrates the ability to speak
several sentences in French and translates a German word.  A fourth guy
is Asian.  But those revelations are so brief that they only serve as
a token nod to characters that, I'm guessing, were established in comic
books.  I think it would have been a lot of fun to get to know this team
better.  Sadly, the movie offers very little in this respect.

Cap's transformation from media icon to actual hero is also hastily
done.  Basically there is a montage of Cap throwing shields at people,
blowing things up, and smacking some more guys with shields.  And then
there is a bit involving a Hydra train in which Cap's best friend is
killed and Cap feels bad about that.  Cap, Cap's friend, and a (as far
as I can recall) nameless third guy zip-line onto a high-speed train for
more action times.  But it's a trap that leaves Cap and his friend
fighting in two separate train cars.  In short order Cap's friend is
killed when a blue plasma blast knocks him off the train and he falls
into a bottomless ravine.  None of that has any effect on the mission at
hand though: while all of this is going down, nameless third guy drops
into the front car and does whatever it is they were there to do.
I don't remember what they were there to do, if it was explained.

The hero's loss of a friend is often paired with a coming-to-terms with
that loss later in the movie.  In this movie it looks like that part was
cut too.  Though in exchange we get a nice geek moment were we find out
why Cap cannot get drunk.

Cap's earlier transition from shrimpy-guy-who-wishes-to-be-more to
media-icon-promoting-vital-war-bonds is better.  After being turned into
a super-soldier, but before he is ever put into combat, Cap saves
a little boy in a daring chase scene in the streets of New York - thus
placing himself in the public mind.  A senator decides to capitalize on
this by putting Cap in the starring role in a musical stage production
that travels the country, declaring the importance of supporting the
troops by buying war bonds.  There are lots of dancing girls in
star-spangled outfits.  Cap himself is dressed in a cheesy costume and
is dubbed "Captain America" for the production.  It feels right for the
period and the singing and dancing are catchy.  The sequence even
explains the superhero outfit and name.  This segment is probably posted
on Youtube.

Apparently Cap's efforts are quite effective at raising money.  But it
is no good because real soldiers do not respect him.  Cap yearns for
a more tangible role in Nazi-fighting.  A role that he could fill if
only there were a two-dimensional supervillian hanging around, bent on
pointless world destruction.

The weird thing is that Cap steps into his role as a superhero with no
training or learning process.  One moment he is wishing that he could be
a real action hero.  The next moment, he is.  Maybe this is just part of
the Captain America character.  But in my opinion a process of discovery
is important to identifying with and respecting a superhero.  This was
made clear to me in the scene where the good guys are solemnly making
their plan for the final assault on the bad guy's base.  Cap ends up
forming the plan himself.  I found myself wishing that Cap would get
some input from the much more seasoned military officer standing next to
him.  From what I saw Cap's qualifications consist only of a montage,
a botched train heist, and a prison break.

The plan of attack on Red Skull's base made no sense at all.  First, Cap
gets himself captured during a one-man assault.  But that is just an act - he
planned to be captured from the beginning.  Ok, that is a fine way to
get oneself into an impenetrable fortress.  Then as Red Skull is
gloating over Cap's arrogance, the rest of Cap's team zip-lines right
into Red Skull's office, crashing through a large window, to save Cap
from imminent execution.  I get that these guys are supposed to be the
best zip-liners that the Allied forces have to offer and that they can
zip-line into any place at any time.  But if they could have crashed in
through the window at any time, why couldn't Captain America have done
the same?  It seems that the only purpose served by Cap's "capture" was
to ensure that the bad guys were on full alert when backup arrived.
Maybe fewer US soldiers would have been vaporized if they'd had a better
plan.  (Seriously, a *lot* of these guys get vaporized.)  Add to that
the scene scant minutes earlier where it was established that this whole
base is 500 feet underground.

Action ensues.  Then there is obligatory romance resolution and some
filler supervillian monologuing.  Finally Cap saves the day by crashing
a big plane loaded with mystery bombs into an icy wasteland.  The big
bombs didn't explode after all; so maybe that final bit of heroism
wasn't really necessary.  But I suppose it makes sense that Captain
America is a "better safe than sorry" type.  Anyway, the plane makes
a modest groove in the ice, but seems to sustain almost no damage
otherwise.  Cap is totally going to walk away from this - straight to
a hero's welcome.  I'm pretty sure we've seen him survive worse.  This
is the same guy who jumps out of planes without a parachute in the
comics, right?  Oh wait, he's not walking away.  For some reason he sits
tight long enough to become completely encased in ice.  Maybe Cap is
also an "it's best to hug a plane" type.

I did appreciate the design of the big doom plane.  It looked like it
was adapted from an actual concept for a luxury passenger aircraft from
the mid-twentieth century that I unfortunately do not remember the name
of.  At an earlier point in the movie Red Skull makes an escape in
a [Focke-Wulf Triebflügel][1], which is another historical concept
plane.  Neither was ever made due to being crazy.  They are cool ideas
though.

[1]: http://www.secretprojects.co.uk/forum/index.php?topic=13333.0

If you take Captain America: The First Avenger for what it may really be
intended as, a prologue to Avengers, it is... not really necessary.
Having background on all of the Avengers is nice for completionists.  We
just need a Black Widow movie to round that out.  Wow Avengers was
a good movie.

Bonus observation: every time I tried to type "Red Skull" while writing
this I actually typed "Gray^H^H^H^HRed Skull".
